Obama Admin Targets Down naSyndrome Babies Under Obamacare

by Mark Leach | Washington, DC | LifeNews.com | 9/12/11 1:02 PM

    Print
    Email

National

     7256
     
    Share

Prenatal testing for Down syndrome should not be considered preventive medicine. Such tests cannot prevent the presence of Down syndrome in a child; but they can decrease the likelihood of a child with Down syndrome surviving beyond the womb. Expectant parents need accurate information, including the many positive outcomes, about life raising a child with Down syndrome.

Last month, my daughter Juliet began second grade, where her mother and I expect her to maintain her B+ average on spelling tests and straight Aa  s in Chinese. In addition to being a loving daughter and big sister, Juliet also is endowed with Down syndrome. At the start of the month, the Department for Health and Human Services (HHS) announced that future births of children like Juliet should be prevented. Down syndrome is the most common genetic cause of intellectual disability and, as such, will be targeted in the new HHS regulationa  s free nationwide prenatal testing program.

Discussions of HHSa  s new regulation have focused on the required availability of free contraceptive services under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA). The regulation is the result of HHSa  s adopting, in its entirety, the Institute of Medicinea  s (IOM) report on Clinical Preventive Services for Women. Buried in the IOM report is the recommendation for no-cost well-woman visits; these visits include prenatal carea "and thus prenatal testing for a  genetic or developmental conditions.a   The regulation was issued as part of the PPACAa  s coverage of preventive services. This prompts the question, how does prenatal testing prevent Down syndrome?

The IOM report defines preventive services a  to be measures . . . shown to improve wellbeing, and/or decrease the likelihood or delay the onset of targeted disease or condition.a   Down syndrome occurs at conception. Prenatal testing simply identifies whether a pregnancy is positive for Down syndromea "a prenatal diagnosis after which most women choose to terminate their pregnancy. A prenatal test does not decrease the likelihood of Down syndrome in a person; it does allow for a decreased likelihood of a person with Down syndrome surviving beyond the womb. If this is how HHS is justifying prenatal testing for Down syndrome as preventive care, then HHS has ushered in a program meant to target future children like Juliet.

The targeted elimination of people with Down syndrome is, in fact, the goal of other countries that have adopted nationwide prenatal testing programsa "a goal some other countries are now realizing. Indeed, according to the Copenhagen Post, Denmark a  could be a country without a single citizen with Downa  s syndrome in the not too distant future,a   due to its nationwide prenatal screening program, in place since 2004.

Perhaps the HHS is not purposefully trying to sneak in a modern-day eugenics program to eliminate Down syndrome by regulation. It is likely that the IOM report relied on professional guidelines that recommend the offering of prenatal testing for Down syndrome. Actual experience, however, has shown that such tests do not a  improve wellbeinga  a "certainly not for the aborted child, but also not for the expecting parents.

Robert Resta, a Genetic Counselor, notes in Augusta  s American Journal of Medical Genetics that a  there is very little empirical evidence that prenatal knowledge improves medical, developmental, emotional, or adaptational outcomes.a   Further, studies have found that prenatal testing increases the mothera  s anxiety, regardless of the test results; that women often do not make informed decisions about accepting prenatal testing or decisions made after a diagnosis and that, when abortion is the chosen response, a significant number of women experience post-traumatic stress.

The lone dissent to the IOM report by a committee member makes the point that clinical guidelines a  were never intended to provide a basis for insurance coverage determinations; they are intended as guides to physician practices.a   Yet, if the IOMa  s incorporation of such guidelines is the HHSa  s justification for covering prenatal testing, then why does HHS not provide for the other information required to accompany prenatal testing?

The IOM report states that informed decision-making a  is structured to give an individual all the information needed to choose from among different clinical options, such as whether to undergo genetic testing.a   Professional guidelines require that physicians be well-informed about Down syndrome, offer accurate information, and recognize that parent support organizations can be very helpful. This summer, the National Society for Genetic Counselors and the American Academy of Pediatrics required that this balancing information be part of prenatal care. Both further note that families a  benefit from hearing a fair and balanced perspective, including the many positive outcomes of children with Down syndrome and their effect on the family.a  

The need for this information is so apparent that, in 2005, two senators from opposite sides of the abortion issue, Senators Ted Kennedy and Sam Brownback, co-sponsored legislation that recognized the need to provide accurate, balanced information and support by parent organizations. In 2008, the Prenatally and Postnatally Diagnosed Conditions Awareness Act was signed into law, but it has yet to receive any appropriations. Similarly, the HHS regulation only requires coverage of the testing itself, but says nothing about covering the provision of proper training, accurate written materials, or support to or through parent organizationsa "things that could, in fact, improve the parentsa   and childa  s wellbeing after receiving a prenatal diagnosis.

It seems hard to believe that Congress and the President meant for the PPACA to institute a national prenatal screening program that targets Down syndrome and also fails to provide all of the required information to expectant mothers. Sen. Mikulski introduced the provision for preventive services for women, yet she was also the lead sponsor of Rosaa  s Law, a law that replaces a  mental retardationa   with a  intellectual disabilitya   in federal publications. Rosaa  s law was named after one of her constituents, who, like Juliet, happens to have Down syndrome. Further, given that HHSa  s regulation not only encourages prenatal testinga  s discrimination against Down syndrome, but also disrespects a womana  s exercise of informed choice, it is unlikely that members of the bipartisan Congressional Down Syndrome Caucus would allow the regulation to remain in effect.

Prenatal testing for Down syndrome should not be labeled as preventive medicinea "inaccurate and misleading description of a procedure that may prevent Down syndrome births, but certainly does not prevent Down syndrome. A regulation should not be allowed to target a portion of our society for elimination without public debate by accountable elected officials. If the regulation is to remain in place, then additional funding should be provided for all the information required to respect a womana  s choice following a prenatal diagnosis. The President and the Congress should see that the new HHS requirements for preventive care expressly exclude coverage of prenatal testing for Down syndrome unless and until there is public debate and balanced funding for the needed resources.

You can help them do that by leaving a comment on this new regulation here.

LifeNews.com Note: Mark W. Leach is an attorney from Louisville, Kentucky. He serves on the Board of Directors for Down Syndrome of Louisville and Down Syndrome Affiliates in Action, a trade association of local parent support organizations. The views expressed here are entirely his own and not to be attributed to any associated organization or LifeNews.com. This article was originally printed in Public Discourse and is reprinted with permission.
