Dems Pin Fate Of Health Care Law On 2012 Election
Kathleen Sebelius, Secretary of the Department of Health and Human ServicesKathleen Sebelius, Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services
share
Sahil Kapur January 19, 2012, 1:47 PM 8830 63

President Obama's health secretary Kathleen Sebelius made a spirited defense of the health care reform law Thursday - one of several signs that Democrats are stepping up their defense of the law ahead of a 2012 election cycle in which Republicans plan to use it as a political pinata.

"We need to understand exactly what's at stake when people talk about repealing the health care law. And make no mistake: those attacks are going to keep coming," Sebelius said in a speech organized by Families USA.

"I believe that over the next few months, we'll see the biggest barrage of attacks and misinformation about the law that we've seen yet," Sebelius continued. "The law's opponents are going to take their best shot. And the reason why is that they know that the facts are not on their side."

So far, the law has insured 2.5 million young adults, saved seniors over $1 billion on prescription drugs and encouraged preventive care visits. But the bulk of the benefits begin in 2014, including some 30 million newly insured Americans and guaranteed coverage regardless of preexisting conditions.

Sebelius said combating the attacks will require educating people about the law and implementing it effectively to ensure the public enjoys its benefits. And she's not the only one thinking along those lines.

"One of the things that leaped out at me in the course of the Super Committee work was the degree to which the Affordable Care Act is actually saving money, and the degree to which it is transforming the delivery of health care," Sen. John Kerry (D-MA) told me. "I don't think that story has been told enough. I certainly intend to start focusing on that more."

Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D-IL), speaking at the same event as Sebelius, invoked the 2012 message as well.

"The November 6 election - just over 41 weeks away - is the most critical election we are likely to face in our lifetimes," she said, according to a transcript from her office. "Losing in November doesn't make it easier to get single-payer or even a public option - it makes it impossible."

Republicans see their message of repeal as a winning issue in 2012 - the Affordable Care Act continues to struggle in the polls and has since mobilized many conservatives against Democrats.

The Obama administration isn't underestimating that political power.

"Today, we are at a make or break moment. On the one hand, we have the most important health legislation since Medicare and Medicaid. On the other hand, we have an opposition that wants to get rid of the law - and then dismantle Medicare and Medicaid along with it," Sebelius said. "We can't turn back. Not now."

The remarks reflect a recognition among Democrats that their political fate is in no small part tied to the health care reform law, and that the fate of the party's signature achievement may well rest on the outcome of the 2012 elections.
Affordable Care Act 
