ObamaCare, the Job Destroyer
Share25
posted at 9:26 am on July 22, 2011 by Howard Portnoy
printer-friendly

President Obama said last week that the public is not paying close attention to the debt crisis, adding:

    They shouldna  t. Theya  re worrying about their family, theya  re worrying about their jobs, theya  re worrying about their neighborhood. Theya  ve got a lot of other things on their plate. Wea  re paid to worry about it.

The tenor of his comment was typically condescending (the masses are too stupid to know whata  s going on in the government), but his observation is right for a change. Several recent polls show that Americans are more concerned about jobs - or, more precisely, the lack thereof - than they are about raising the debt limit.

And justifiably so. Bureau of Labor Statistics data reveal that the percentage of Americans who are employed has decreased since the since the official end of the recession in June 2009. Moreover, Americans receiving paychecks are now earning less than they were during the recession.

Ita  s a curious development, to be sure. An analysis by James Sherk of the Heritage Foundation suggests that the main cause of the slowdown is a piece of legislation the president affixed his signature to. No, ita  s not the $8 billion package. The culprit, rather, is ObamaCare, which was signed into law on March 23, 2010. (h/t Jeffrey Anderson, Weekly Standard)

Sherk identifies three ways in which the health care reform law has stultified hiring:

    Businesses with fewer than 50 workers have a strong incentive to maintain this size, which allows them to avoid the mandate to provide government-approved health coverage or face a penalty;
    Businesses with more than 50 workers will see their costs for health coverage rise - they must purchase more expensive government-approved insurance or pay a penalty; and
    Employers face considerable uncertainty about what constitutes qualifying health coverage and what it will cost. They also do not know what the health care market or their health care costs will look like in four years. This makes planning for the future difficult.

In support of the last bullet point, Sherk cites a recent survey in which 33% of business owners said that the health care law was either their greatest or second-greatest obstacle to new hiring. He also quotes Dennis Lockhart, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as claiming:

    In addition to slow and uncertain revenue growth, contacts in this recovery are frequently citing a number of other factors that are impeding hiring. Prominent among these is the lack of clarity about the cost implications of the recent health care legislation. Wea  ve frequently heard strong comments to the effect of a ~my company wona  t hire a single additional worker until we know what health insurance costs are going to be.a  

One might optimistically paraphrase Nancy Pelosi and say companies wona  t know how the law impacts business until it takes full effect in 2014. In the meantime, thata  s cold comfort to the 14 million Americans out of work.

As August 2 draws closer and the prospects for a compromise between the House and the White House grow dimmer, maybe this would be a good time for the president to share the sacrifice he is calling on legislators to make. Shelving the health care law would cut $2 trillion from the deficit. Is the president willing to do his part to keep the nation from defaulting on its debt?
