SaintPetersBlogFollowRSS
Daily Kos member

    Profile
    Diaries (list)
    Stream

Thu Dec 22, 2011 at 05:35 AM PST
Ten reasons to champion the Affordable Care Act

by saintpetersblogFollow
Share
permalink 	7 Comments

How does the landmark health care reform legislation, called the Affordable Care Act, really measure up on the 2011 scorecard? It scores 4 stars out of 5.  Thata  s pretty good given its youth and grand vision to improve health care access, affordability and quality for all Americans in this decade. Despite a lot of noise and confusion over opponentsa   claims, a quick look at the facts shows that this reform law is well on its way to helping protect working families and the middle class. Even here in Florida, and in spite of Governor Scotta  s vehement opposition to the law through litigation, refusal to accept significant federal funds or prepare to implement its upcoming provisions, we see positive results.

60% of Americans say the ACA should be given time more time to work to fully realize its benefits.*  Herea  s why:

1)      GRANDMA WILL GET BETTER BENEFITS- The Affordable Care Act  (ACA) protects Medicare for current seniors and strengthens it for future generations by focusing on the provision of free preventative care, reducing medication costs, and cracking down on waste, fraud and abuse, ending handouts to insurance, medical device and pharmaceutical companies.

2)      SAVING FLORIDAa  S SENIORS MILLIONS a " More than 100,000 Florida seniors have benefited from the prescription coverage gap discount this year, saving nearly $52 million. Seniors will receive bigger discounts in the years ahead. By 2020, the so-called a ~donut holea   coverage gap in prescription medicine costs will be closed completely.

3)      COVERAGE FOR YOUNG ADULTS- Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, 2.5 million more young adults (under 26) have health insurance coverage in 2011. An estimated 78,000 young adults in Florida will gain coverage this year because of this provision.

4)      A POUND OF CURE a " Nationwide, 24 million people a " or approximately half of those who have traditional Medicare a " have taken advantage of free preventative health benefits, including an annual evaluation, and/or other free screening services, such as mammography, colonoscopy, and immunizations.

5)      FOLLOW THE MONEY- Through 2011, the Prevention and Public Health Fund has already provided a total of $23.3 million to Florida to support the critical work of State and local health departments. Even though Gov. Scott has turned away many ACA related funds, there is still a financial lifeline to help enact its provisions.  

6)      CUTS WASTE, FRAUD, AND ABUSE a " It will be much harder to bilk Medicare and Medicaid. In a sweeping effort to restore accountability, the Affordable Care Act returned $5.6 billion back to Medicare by cutting waste, fraud and abuse.

7)      YOUR CHILDa  S ASTHMA WONa  T GET HER KICKED OFF YOUR INSURANCE PLAN - The Affordable Care Act protects 960,000 children in Florida with pre-existing conditions right now.  In 2014, under the ACA, NO person can be denied insurance coverage for pre-existing medical conditions, and they will pay the same premiums as those without such conditions.

8)      JOBS, JOBS, JOBS-  Within one year of  the passage of the Affordable Care Act, 1.4 million jobs have been created.  235,000 of those jobs are in healthcare, a growth sector

9)      THE AMERICAN SPIRIT OF SERVICE - The ACA strengthens a longtime program that allows medical graduates to get up to $175,000 in loans paid off in return for five years of medical service to underserved communities.

10)  SCHOOL BASED CLINICS- $2.6 million for School Based Health Centers in Florida will help clinics expand and provide more health care services directly to communities.

A WORD ABOUT HEALTH CARE REFORM OPPONENTS:

Many of the opponents of health care reform in Congress want to take away most or all of the provisions mentioned above ... but only from you. These protections are still good enough to keep for themselves as members of Congress. And, of course, they see healthcare as a privilege, rather than a basic human need.  They think that the more money you have, or the more important your job is, the more entitled you are to get your health care needs met.

IS THE LAW CONSTITUTIONAL?

Social Security and Medicare went through the same growing pains and Supreme Court challenges to become the important, highly valued services they are today.  More than a hundred law professors, 35 economists, and three Nobel Prize winners say therea  s no doubt the new health law is constitutional. A majority of circuit court judges have ruled in favor of the lawa  s requirement for everyone to pay into their own insurance, including notoriously conservative justices.

THE BOTTOM LINE

The Affordable Care Act is working to both protect more American families and to fix a badly broken health care system. We need to keep the law in place and begin the work to make it even better.  Learn about this new lawa  s benefits, know how it affects you, fight for it, and defend it.  The facts are on your side, and your life might someday depend on it.

The preceding was first posted on SaintPetersBlog.com by Darden Rice, Florida Communications Directors, Know Your Care/Protect Your Care.
Tags

    Affordable Care Act
    Barack Obama
    Health Care
    medicare


