DrSteveBFollowRSS
Daily Kos member

    Profile
    Diaries (list)
    Stream

Wed Jan 05, 2011 at 01:08 PM PST
Which 28 Health Reforms in 2010-11 Do They Want to Kill?

by DrSteveBFollow
ShareNew
permalink 	10 Comments

While the Republicans in Congress call for repeal, below is the timeline of implementation from the official Administration healthcare.gov website which lists the health reform bill items that are already implemented from 2010 or to be implemented in 2011.

I am numbering the items, so that the Republicans can tell us preciselly which parts do they think are so evil?  Which specific items do they want to go on record as being opposed to?


To be implemented in 2011:

    IMPROVING QUALITY AND LOWERING COSTS

        Offering Prescription Drug Discounts. Seniors who reach the coverage gap will receive a 50 percent discount when buying Medicare Part D covered brand-name prescription drugs. Over the next ten years, seniors will receive additional savings on brand-name and generic drugs until the coverage gap is closed in 2020. Effective January 1, 2011.

        Providing Free Preventive Care for Seniors.  The law provides certain free preventive services, such as annual wellness visits and personalized prevention plans for seniors on Medicare.  Effective January 1, 2011.

        Improving Health Care Quality and Efficiency.  The law establishes a new Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation that will begin testing new ways of delivering care to patients. These methods are expected to improve the quality of care, and reduce the rate of growth in health care costs for Medicare, Medicaid, and the Childrena  s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). Additionally, by January 1, 2011, HHS will submit a national strategy for quality improvement in health care, including by these programs.  Effective no later than January 1, 2011.

        Improving Care for Seniors After They Leave the Hospital. The Community Care Transitions Program will help high risk Medicare beneficiaries who are hospitalized avoid unnecessary readmissions by coordinating care and connecting patients to services in their communities. Effective January 1, 2011.

        Introducing New Innovations to Bring Down Costs.  The Independent Payment Advisory Board will begin operations to develop and submit proposals to Congress and the President aimed at  extending the life of the Medicare Trust Fund.  The Board is expected to focus on ways to target waste in the system, and recommend ways to reduce costs, improve health outcomes for patients, and expand access to high-quality care.  Administrative funding becomes available October 1, 2011.

    INCREASING ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE CARE

        Increasing Access to Services at Home and in the Community.  The new Community First Choice Option allows States to offer home and community based services to disabled individuals through Medicaid rather than institutional care in nursing homes.  Effective beginning October 1, 2011.

    HOLDING INSURANCE COMPANIES ACCOUNTABLE

        Bringing Down Health Care Premiums. To ensure premium dollars are spent primarily on health care, the new law generally requires that at least 85% of all premium dollars collected by insurance companies for large employer plans are spent on health care services and health care quality improvement.  For plans sold to individuals and small employers, at least 80% of the premium must be spent on benefits and quality improvement. If insurance companies do not meet these goals, because their administrative costs or profits are too high, they must provide rebates to consumers. Effective January 1, 2011.

        Addressing Overpayments to Big Insurance Companies and Strengthening Medicare Advantage.  Today, Medicare pays Medicare Advantage insurance companies over $1,000 more per person on average than is spent per person in Traditional Medicare. This results in increased premiums for all Medicare beneficiaries, including the 77 percent of beneficiaries who are not currently enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan. The new law levels the playing field by gradually eliminating this discrepancy.  People enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan will still receive all guaranteed Medicare benefits, and the law provides bonus payments to Medicare Advantage plans that provide high quality care.  Effective January 1, 2011.

Already implemented in 2010:

    NEW CONSUMER PROTECTIONS

        Putting Information for Consumers Online. The law provides for an easy-to-use website where consumers can compare health insurance coverage options and pick the coverage that works for them. Effective July 1, 2010.

        Prohibiting Denying Coverage of Children Based on Pre-Existing Conditions. The new law includes new rules to prevent insurance companies from denying coverage to children under the age of 19 due to a pre-existing condition. Effective for health plan years beginning on or after September 23, 2010 for new plans and existing group plans.  

        Prohibiting Insurance Companies from Rescinding Coverage.  In the past, insurance companies could search for an error, or other technical mistake, on a customera  s application and use this error to deny payment for services when he or she got sick. The new law makes this illegal. After media reports cited incidents of breast cancer patients losing coverage, insurance companies agreed to end this practice immediately. Effective for health plan years beginning on or after September 23, 2010.  

        Eliminating Lifetime Limits on Insurance Coverage. Under the new law, insurance companies will be prohibited from imposing lifetime dollar limits on essential benefits, like hospital stays.  Effective for health plan years beginning on or after September 23, 2010.

        Regulating Annual Limits on Insurance Coverage.  Under the new law, insurance companiesa   use of annual dollar limits on the amount of insurance coverage a patient may receive will be restricted for new plans in the individual market and all group plans. In 2014, the use of annual dollar limits on essential benefits like hospital stays will be banned for new plans in the individual market and all group plans. Effective for health plan years beginning on or after September 23, 2010.

        Appealing Insurance Company Decisions.  The law provides consumers with a way to appeal coverage determinations or claims to their insurance company, and establishes an external review process. Effective for new plans beginning on or after September 23, 2010.

        Establishing Consumer Assistance Programs in the States. Under the new law, states that apply receive federal grants to help set up or expand independent offices to help consumers navigate the private health insurance system. These programs help consumers file complaints and appeals; enroll in health coverage; and get educated about their rights and responsibilities in group health plans or individual health insurance policies. The programs will also collect data on the types of problems consumers have, and file reports with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to identify trouble spots that need further oversight. Read a list of those who have received CAP grants. Grants Awarded October 2010.

    IMPROVING QUALITY AND LOWERING COSTS

        Providing Small Business Health Insurance Tax Credits.  Up to 4 million small businesses are eligible for tax credits to help them provide insurance benefits to their workers. The first phase of this provision provides a credit worth up to 35 percent of the employera  s contribution to the employeesa   health insurance. Small non-profit organizations may receive up to a 25 percent credit. Effective now.

        Offering Relief for 4 Million Seniors Who Hit the Medicare Prescription Drug "Donut Hole."  An estimated four million seniors will reach the gap in Medicare prescription drug coverage known as the "donut hole" this year.  Each such senior will receive a $250 rebate. First checks mailed in June, 2010, and will continue monthly throughout 2010 as seniors hit the coverage gap.

        Providing Free Preventive Care. All new plans must cover certain preventive services such as mammograms and colonoscopies without charging a deductible, co-pay or coinsurance. Effective for health plan years beginning on or after September 23, 2010.

        Preventing Disease and Illness.  A new $15 billion Prevention and Public Health Fund will invest in proven prevention and public health programs that can help keep Americans healthy a " from smoking cessation to combating obesity.  Funding begins in 2010.

        Cracking Down on Health Care Fraud. Current efforts to fight fraud have returned more than $2.5 billion to the Medicare Trust Fund in fiscal year 2009 alone. The new law invests new resources and requires new screening procedures for health care providers to boost these efforts and reduce fraud and waste in Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP.  Many provisions effective now.

    INCREASING ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE CARE

        Providing Access to Insurance for Uninsured Americans with Pre-Existing Conditions.  A new Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan will provide new coverage options to individuals who have been uninsured for at least six months because of a pre-existing condition. States have the option of running this new program in their state. If a state chooses not to do so, a plan will be established by the Department of Health and Human Services in that state.  National program effective July 1, 2010.

        Extending Coverage for Young Adults.  Under the new law, young adults will be allowed to stay on their parentsa   plan until they turn 26 years old (in the case of existing group health plans, this right does not apply if the young adult is offered insurance at work). While the provision takes effect in September, many insurance companies have already implemented this new practice. Check with your insurance company or employer to see if you qualify. Effective for health plan years beginning on or after September 23.

        Expanding Coverage for Early Retirees.  Too often, Americans who retire without employer-sponsored insurance and before they are eligible for Medicare see their life savings disappear because of high rates in the individual market. To preserve employer coverage for early retirees until more affordable coverage is available through the new Exchanges by 2014, the new law creates a $5 billion program to provide needed financial help for employment-based plans to continue to provide valuable coverage to people who retire between the ages of 55 and 65, as well as their spouses and dependents. Applications for employers to participate in the program available June 1, 2010. For more information on the Early Retiree Reinsurance Program, visit www.ERRP.gov.

        Rebuilding the Primary Care Workforce.  To strengthen the availability of primary care, there are new incentives in the law to expand the number of primary care doctors, nurses and physician assistants. These include funding for scholarships and loan repayments for primary care doctors and nurses working in underserved areas. Doctors and nurses receiving payments made under any State loan repayment or loan forgiveness program intended to increase the availability of health care services in underserved or health professional shortage areas will not have to pay taxes on those payments.  Effective 2010 .

        Holding Insurance Companies Accountable for Unreasonable Rate Hikes.  The law allows states that have, or plan to implement, measures that require insurance companies to justify their premium increases will be eligible for $250 million in new grants. Insurance companies with excessive or unjustified premium exchanges may not be able to participate in the new health insurance Exchanges in 2014.  Grants awarded beginning in 2010.

        Allowing States to Cover More People on Medicaid.  States will be able to receive  federal matching funds for covering some additional low-income individuals and families under Medicaid for whom federal funds were not previously available. This will make it easier for states that choose to do so to cover more of their residents. Effective April 1, 2010.

        Increasing Payments for Rural Health Care Providers.  Today, 68 percent of medically underserved communities across the nation are in rural areas. These communities often have trouble attracting and retaining medical professionals. The law provides increased payment to rural health care providers to help them continue to serve their communities.  Effective 2010.

        Strengthening Community Health Centers.  The law includes new funding to support the construction of and expand services at community health centers, allowing these centers to serve some 20 million new patients across the country.  Effective 2010.


Now, as a single payer supporter, I regret that the Obama-Baucus legislation we got is not a whole bigger, broader, stronger. I am saddened by the likelihood that up 40 to million individuals will still not have insurance coverage (especially with the state-level Medicaid cuts we are likely to see in the short run; that neither individual affordability and systemwide costs are not really well controlled and the many other mediocre to bad things about the bill we got.


And of course it took one day for the Republicans to make a mockery of the foolish Democratic adherence to PayGo and CBO scoring that led to stringing out implementation all the out to 2015.


But still there is a lot of good stuff in there. And the Republican alternatives are either bad or, literally, nothing.

So please, tell me again, which of the 28 actual items do they want to go on record as killing?
Originally posted to DrSteveB on Wed Jan 05, 2011 at 01:08 PM PST.
Tags

    aca
    Congress
    health
    insurance
    PPACA
    reform
    Republicans
    Rescued
    Single Payer


