ObamaCare projected to cost more than doing nothing
Share86
posted at 9:36 am on July 29, 2011 by Bruce McQuain
[ Healthcare ]    printer-friendly

Promises, promises, promises. President Obama promised the passage of the Affordable Care Act would lower health care costs across the board, making health care a  more affordablea  . The entire premise of the massive government intrusion in that market was to lower costs and make insurance more affordable.

A new study says that doing nothing would actually have been slightly less expensive. The irony is this isna  t some opposition think tank which has put up these numbers but the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services:

    Despite President Obamaa  s promises to rein in health care costs as part of his reform bill, health spending nationwide is expected to rise more than if the sweeping legislation had never become law.

    Total spending is projected to grow annually by 5.8 percent under Mr. Obamaa  s Affordable Care Act, according to a 10-year forecast by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services released Thursday. Without the ACA, spending would grow at a slightly slower rate of 5.7 percent annually.

The primary reason, supporters say, is more people will have insurance.

    CMS officials attributed the growth to an expansion of the insured population. Under the plan, an estimated 23 million Americans are expected to obtain insurance in 2014, largely through state-based exchanges and expanded Medicaid eligibility.

    The federal government is projected to spend 20 percent more on Medicaid, while spending on private health insurance is expected to rise by 9.4 percent.

Anyone a " do you know why a  private health insurance costsa   are expected to rise by 9.4%? Because the privately insured will be tapped to help pay the difference between what an expanded Medicaid base pays and what doctors charge. Or, in other words, they will be the victim of government intrusion and market distortion. And of course government is then going to point to the costs its distortion caused and claim it should help solve the problem it has created. And what will be eventual answer to those increased costs caused by government distortion be? Single-payer, of course.

This study doesna  t address the other real problem a " you may expand Medicaid dramatically, but having that insurance doesna  t guarantee seeing a doctor. Other studies have shown that increasing the insurance base doesna  t decrease emergency room use, but instead increases it in the face of a building doctor shortage. And then, of course, there are those doctors who simply wona  t take Medicaid (or any more than they now have) because of the low reimbursement rate.

So when the White Housea  s Nancy-Ann DeParle says:

    a  The Affordable Care Act creates changes to the health care system that typically dona  t show up on an accounting table,a   she said. a  We know these new provisions will save money for the health care system, even if todaya  s report doesna  t credit these strategies with reducing costs.a  

Shea  s also leaving out that part of the problem that doesna  t a  show up on an accounting tablea   as well.

Bottom line, we were sold a lemon, a bill of goods, snake oil. All the ACA does is give the government a legal ability to intrude deeper and deeper in a market it really has no business being in at all and to distort that market even further. And thata  s precisely what is going to happen. We all know that when government gets in as deep as it will be in this market, nothing ends up a  costing lessa  .

a "

Bruce McQuain blogs at Questions and Observations (QandO), Blackfive, theWashington Examiner and the Green Room.  Follow him on Twitter: @McQandO
