OnomasticFollowRSS
Daily Kos member

    Profile
    Diaries (list)
    Stream

Tue Nov 23, 2010 at 06:25 PM PST
Good News For Us! Bad News for the Health Insurance Industry!

by OnomasticFollow
ShareNew
permalink 	57 Comments

For months, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) has been meeting with Insurance industry and consumer representatives to determine the way our insurance payments should be spent. Today, Health and Human Services released the regulations on Medical/Loss Ratios for Health Insurance Companies. The days of 50% of our health care dollars going to CEO salaries and other so called "Administrative Expenses" are over.

Instead, 80% to 85% of our health care dollars has to be spent on...Gasp!....Us!  Imagine that? Your money actually working for you, instead of someone else. And the health insurance companies have to document how they spend your money.
Transparency!
OMG, their docs will be visible to the naked eye! Now, now.....Come on now.....Not doctors in transparent scrubs.....Documents!    

That way if the insurance companies aren't spending your money on you, you'll know. Heck, Secretary Sebelius will know. And you'll get a rebate while they get in trouble. At least I hope they do. No playing in the Exchange Pool works for me!

    New regulations issued today by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) require health insurers to spend 80 to 85 percent of consumersa   premiums on direct care for patients and efforts to improve care quality.   This regulation, known as the "medical loss ratio" provision of the Affordable Care Act, will make the insurance marketplace more transparent and make it easier for consumers to purchase plans that provide better value for their money.

    "Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, millions of Americans will get better value for their health insurance premium dollar," said HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.  "These new rules are an important step to hold insurance companies accountable and increase value for consumers."

    Today, many insurance companies spend a substantial portion of consumersa   premium dollars on administrative costs and profits, including executive salaries, overhead, and marketing.  Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, consumers will receive more value for their premium dollar because insurance companies will be required to spend 80 to 85 percent of premium dollars on medical care and health care quality improvement, rather than on administrative costs, starting in 2011.  If they dona  t, the insurance companies will be required to provide a rebate to their customers starting in 2012.

http://www.hhs.gov/...

Now of course there are some exceptions to all this fun.
Come on now. You knew there would be. :)

    a " Employers and insurers that offer "mini-med" policies, which often cap coverage or have limited payouts, will be given at least an extra year to gather data before falling under the requirement.

    a " States may apply to have the requirement adjusted if meeting the 80 percent spending require would destabilize their individual market, Sebelius said. Four states a " Maine, Iowa, South Carolina and Georgia a " have already said they would seek adjustments.

    a " Some small plans will not have to provide rebates, at least for the first year.

http://www.npr.org/...

Now I live in one of those states, Maine, that are already seeking adjustments. Not happy about it at all, though the limited number of providers explains a great deal about the State's action.  

That aside, it's a very good day for people and their health care dollars. In spite of insurers pushing to broadly expand the definition of "medical spending", they didn't get their way.
- Cost of paying claims as medical spending? Nope.

- How about enrolling Physicians into the network?  ummmmm.....No.  

- But surely customer service call centers qualify as medical care?
 .........Absolutely not!

Needless to say, the Health Insurance Industry was not happy when the NAIC recommendations were sent to Secretary Sebelius in October. Our favorite "give me the money" Industry exec - Americaa  s Health Insurance Plans president and CEO Karen Ignagni, complained that the recommendations would, "reduce competition, disrupt coverage and threaten patientsa   access to health plansa   quality improvement services."

When haven't we heard that one before?
At this point it's boring poutage.

What isn't boring is the work done on our behalf by The NAIC and Secretary Sebelius.

We've all won a vitally important battle and that's a BFD!
Originally posted to Onomastic on Tue Nov 23, 2010 at 06:25 PM PST.
Tags

    affordability
    Health Care
    health insurance
    PPACA
    reform


